macOS
=====

**macOS** (previously **OS X** and originally **Mac OS X**) is a `Unix <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix>`__ operating system developed and marketed by `Apple Inc. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_Inc.>`__ since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's `Mac computers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_(computer>`__). Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the `second most widely used desktop OS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_operating_systems#Desktop_and_laptop_computers>`__, after `Microsoft Windows <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Windows>`__ and ahead of `ChromeOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ChromeOS>`__.

macOS succeeded the `classic Mac OS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_Mac_OS>`__, a `Mac operating system <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_operating_system>`__ with nine releases from 1984 to 1999. During this time, Apple cofounder `Steve Jobs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Jobs>`__ had left Apple and started another company, `NeXT <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NeXT_Computer>`__, developing the `NeXTSTEP <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NeXTSTEP>`__ platform that would later be acquired by Apple to form the basis of macOS.

The first desktop version, `Mac OS X 10.0 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_OS_X_10.0>`__, was released in March 2001, with its first update, 10.1, arriving later that year. All releases from `Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_OS_X_Leopard>`__ and after are `UNIX 03 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UNIX_03>`__ certified, with an exception for `OS X 10.7 Lion <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS_X_Lion>`__. Apple's other operating systems (`iOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS>`__, `iPadOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPadOS>`__, `watchOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WatchOS>`__, `tvOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TvOS>`__, `audioOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AudioOS>`__) are derivatives of macOS.

A prominent part of macOS's original `brand identity <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brand_identity>`__ was the use of `Roman numeral <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_numerals>`__ X, pronounced "ten" as in Mac OS X and also the `iPhone X <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPhone_X>`__, as well as `code naming <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_name>`__ each release after species of `big cats <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_cat>`__, or places within `California <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/California>`__. Apple shortened the name to "OS X" in 2011 and then changed it to "macOS" in 2016 to align with the branding of Apple's other operating systems, `iOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS>`__, `watchOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WatchOS>`__, and `tvOS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TvOS>`__. After sixteen distinct `versions <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_versioning>`__ of macOS 10, `macOS Big Sur <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacOS_Big_Sur>`__ was presented as version 11 in 2020, `macOS Monterey <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacOS_Monterey>`__ was presented as version 12 in 2021, and `macOS Ventura <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacOS_Ventura>`__ was presented as version 13 in 2022.

macOS has supported three major processor architectures, beginning with `PowerPC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PowerPC>`__-based Macs in 1999. In 2006, Apple `transitioned to the Intel architecture <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_transition_to_Intel_processors>`__ with a line of `Macs using Intel Core processors <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple–Intel_architecture>`__. In 2020, Apple began the `Apple silicon transition <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_transition_to_Apple_silicon>`__, using self-designed, `64-bit ARM <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64>`__-based `Apple M series <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_M_series>`__ processors on the latest `Macintosh <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macintosh>`__ computers.

--------

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia